Buffeted by swirling winds, the little green biplane struggled northward between the mountains beyond Northfield Gulf.
Wires whined as a cold November blast rocked the silver wings, but the engine roar was reassuring to the pilot bundled in the open cockpit.
He peered ahead and grinned as the railroad tracks came into view again below.
"Good old iron compass!" He thought.
A plume of smoke rose from a Central Vermont locomotive which idled behind a string of gravel cars, and little figures that were workmen labored to set the ruptured roadbed to rights.
The girders of a shattered Dog River bridge lay strewn for half a mile downstream.
Vermont's main railroad line was prostrate.
And in the dark days after the Great Flood of 1927 -- the worst natural disaster in the state's history -- the little plane was its sole replacement in carrying the United States mails.
Rain of near cloudburst proportions had fallen for three full days and it was still raining on the morning of Friday, November 4, 1927, when officials of the Post Office Department's Railway Mail Service realized that their distribution system for Vermont had been almost totally destroyed overnight.
Clerks and postmasters shoveled muck out of their offices -- those who still had offices -- and wondered how to move the mail.
The state's railroad system counted miles of broken bridges and missing rights-of-way: it would obviously remain out of commission for weeks.
And once medicine, food, clothing and shelter had been provided for the flood's victims, communications and the mail were the next top problems.
From Burlington, outgoing mail could be ferried across Lake Champlain to the railroad at Port Kent, N.Y.
But what came in was piling up.
The nearest undisrupted end of track from Boston was at Concord, N.H.
When Governor Al Smith offered New York National Guard planes to fly the mail in and out of the state, it seemed a likely temporary solution, easing Burlington's bottleneck and that at Montpelier too.
The question was "Where to land?" There was no such thing as an airport in Vermont.
Burlington aviator John J.
Burns suggested the parade ground southwest of Fort Ethan Allen, and soon a dozen hastily-summoned National Guard pilots were bringing their wide-winged "Jenny" and DeHaviland two-seaters to rest on the frozen sod of the military base.
The only available field that could be used near flood-ravaged Montpelier was on the Towne farm off upper Main Street, a narrow hillside where takeoffs and landings could be safely made only under light wind conditions.
Over in Barre the streets had been deep in swirling water, and bridges were crumpled and gone.
Anticipating delivery of medicines and yeast by plane, Granite City citizens formed an airfield committee and with the aid of quarrymen and the 172nd Infantry, Vermont National Guard, laid out runways on Wilson flat, high on Millstone Hill.
The "Barre Aviation Field" was set to receive its first aircraft the Sunday following the flood.
Though the makeshift airports were ready, the York State Guard flyers proved unable to keep any kind of mail schedule.
They had courage but their meager training consisted of weekend hops in good weather, in and out of established airports, and the increasingly cold weather soon raised hob with the water cooled engines of their World War I planes.
It seemed like a good time for officials to use a recently-passed law empowering the post office department to contract for the transport of first class mail by air.
They had to act fast, for letters were clogging the terminals.
Down in Concord, New Hampshire, was a flier in the right place at the right time: Robert S.
Fogg, a native New Englander, had been a World War I flying instructor, barnstormer, and one of the original planners of the Concord Airport.
O'Banion was a complex and frightening man, whose bright blue eyes stared with a kind of frozen candour into others'.
He had a round, frank Irish face, creased in a jovial grin that stayed bleakly in place even when he was pumping bullets into someone's body.
He carried three guns -- one in the right trouser pocket, one under his left armpit, one in the left outside coat pocket -- and was equally lethal with both hands.
He killed accurately, freely, and dispassionately.
The police credited him with twenty-five murders but he was never brought to trial for one of them.
Like a fair number of bootleggers he disliked alcohol.
He was an expert florist, tenderly dextrous in the arrangement of bouquets and wreaths.
He had no apparent comprehension of morality; he divided humanity into "right guys" and "wrong guys," and the wrong ones he was always willing to kill and trample under.
He had what was described by a psychologist as a "sunny brutality.
" He walked with a heavy list to the right, as that leg was four inches shorter than the other, but the lurch did not reduce his feline quickness with his guns.
Landesco thought him "just a superior sort of plugugly" but he was, in fact, with his aggression and hostility, and nerveless indifference to risking or administering pain, a casebook psychopath.
He was also at this time, although not so interwoven in high politics and the rackets as Torrio and Capone, the most powerful and most dangerous mob leader in the Chicago underworld, the roughneck king.
On April 17, 1610, the sturdy little three-masted bark, Discovery, weighed anchor in St.
Katherine's Pool, London, and floated down the Thames toward the sea.
She carried, besides her captain, a crew of twenty-one and provisions for a voyage of exploration of the Arctic waters of North America.
Seventeen months later, on September 6, 1611, an Irish fishing boat sighted the Discovery limping eastward outside Galway Bay.
When she reached port, she was found to have on board only eight men, all near starvation.
The captain was gone, and the mate was gone.
The man who now commanded her had started the voyage as an ordinary seaman.
What disaster struck the Discovery during those seventeen months? What happened to the fourteen missing men? These questions have remained one of the great sea mysteries of all time.
For hundreds of years, the evidence available consisted of (1) the captain's fragmentary journal, (2) a highly prejudiced account by one of the survivors, (3) a note found in a dead man's desk on board, and (4) several second-hand reports.
All told, they offered a highly confused picture.
But since 1927, researchers digging into ancient court records and legal files have been able to find illuminating pieces of information.
Not enough to do away with all doubts, but sufficient to give a fairly accurate picture of the events of the voyage.
Historians have had two reasons for persisting so long in their investigations.
First, they wanted to clarify a tantalizing, bizarre enigma.
Second, they believed it important to determine the fate of the captain -- a man whose name is permanently stamped on our maps, on American towns and counties, on a great American river, and on half a million square miles of Arctic seas.
The name: Henry Hudson.
This is the story of his last tragic voyage, as nearly as we are able -- or ever, probably, will be able -- to determine: The sailing in the spring of 1610 was Hudson's fourth in four years.
Each time his objective had been the same -- a direct water passage from Western Europe to the Far East.
In 1607 and 1608, the English Muscovy Company had sent him northward to look for a route over the North Pole or across the top of Russia.
Twice he had failed, and the Muscovy Company indicated it would not back him again.
In 1609, the Dutch East India Company hired Hudson, gave him two learned geographers, fitted him out with a ship called the Half Moon, and supplied him with Dutch sailors.
This time he turned westward, to the middle Atlantic coast of North America.
His chief discovery was important -- the Great North (later, the Hudson) River -- but it produced no northwest passage.
When the Half Moon put in at Dartmouth, England, in the fall of 1609, word of Hudson's findings leaked out, and English interest in him revived.
The government forbade Hudson to return to Amsterdam with his ship.
He thereupon went to London and spent the winter talking to men of wealth.
By springtime, he was supported by a rich merchant syndicate under the patronage of Henry, Prince of Wales.
He had obtained and provisioned a veteran ship called the Discovery and had recruited a crew of twenty-one, the largest he had ever commanded.
The purpose of this fourth voyage was clear.
A century of exploration had established that a great land mass, North and South America, lay between Europe and the Indies.
One by one, the openings in the coast that promised a passage through had been explored and discarded.
In fact, Hudson's sail up the Great North River had disposed of one of the last hopes.
But there remained one mysterious, unexplored gap, far to the north.
Nearly twenty-five years before, Captain John Davis had noted, as he sailed near the Arctic Circle, "a very great gulf, the water whirling and roaring, as it were the meeting of tides."
He named this opening, between Baffin Island and Labrador, the "Furious Overfall."
(Later, it was to be called Hudson Strait.)
In 1602, George Waymouth, in the same little Discovery that Hudson now commanded, had sailed 300 miles up the strait before his frightened men turned the ship back.
Hudson now proposed to sail all the way through and test the seas beyond for the long-sought waterway.
Even Hudson, experienced in Arctic sailing and determined as he was, must have had qualms as he slid down the Thames.
Ahead were perilous, ice-filled waters.
On previous voyages, it had been in precisely such dangerous situations that he had failed as a leader and captain.
They were west of the Sabine, but only God knew where.
For three days, their stolid oxen had plodded up a blazing valley as flat and featureless as a dead sea.
Molten glare singed their eyelids an angry crimson; suffocating air sapped their strength and strained their nerves to snapping; dust choked their throats and lay like acid in their lungs.
And the valley stretched endlessly out ahead, scorched and baked and writhing in its heat, until it vanished into the throbbing wall of fiery orange brown haze.
Ben Prime extended his high-stepped stride until he could lay his goad across the noses of the oxen.
"Hoa-whup!" He commanded from his raw throat, and felt the pain of movement in his cracked, black burned lips.
He removed his hat to let the trapped sweat cut rivulets through the dust film upon his gaunt face.
He spat.
The dust-thick saliva came from his mouth like balled cotton.
He moved back to the wheel and stood there blowing, grasping the top of a spoke to still the trembling of his played-out limbs.
The burning air dried his sweat-soaked clothes in salt-edged patches.
He cleared his throat and wet his lips.
As cheerfully as possible, he said, "Well, I guess we could all do with a little drink."
He unlashed the dipper and drew water from a barrel.
They could no longer afford the luxury of the canvas sweat bag that cooled it by evaporation.
The water was warm and stale and had a brackish taste.
But it was water.
Thank the Lord, they still had water! He cleansed his mouth with a small quantity.
He took a long but carefully controlled draught.
He replenished the dipper and handed it to his young wife riding the hurricane deck.
She took it grudgingly, her dark eyes baleful as they met his.
She drank and pushed back her gingham bonnet to wet a kerchief and wipe her face.
She set the dipper on the edge of the deck, leaving it for him to stretch after it while she looked on scornfully.
"What happens when there's no more water?" She asked smolderingly.
She was like charcoal, he thought -- dark, opaque, explosive.
Her thick hair was the color and texture of charcoal.
Her temper sparked like charcoal when it first lights up.
And all the time, she had the heat of hatred in her, like charcoal that is burning on its under side, but not visibly.
A ripple ran through the muscles of his jaws, but he kept control upon his voice.
"There must be some water under there.
" He tilted his homely face toward the dry bed of the river.
"We can get it if we dig," he said patiently.
"And add fever to our troubles?" She scoffed.
"Or do you want to see if I can stand fever, too?" "We can boil it," he said.
Her chin sharpened.
"We're lost and burning up already," she bit out tensely.
"The tires are rattling on the wheels now.
They'll roll off in another day.
There was no valley like this on your map.
You don't even know where we're headed."
"Hettie," he said as gently as he could, "we're still headed west.
Somewhere, we'll hit a trail."
"Somewhere!" She repeated.
"Maybe in time to make a cross and dig our graves."
His wide mouth compressed.
In a way, he couldn't blame her.
He had picked out this pathless trail, instead of the common one, in a moment of romantic fancy, to give them privacy on their honeymoon.
It had been a mistake, but anything would have been a mistake, as it turned out.
It wasn't the roughness and crudity and discomfort of the trip that had frightened her.
She had hated the whole idea before they started.
In Ireland's County Limerick, near the River Shannon, there is a quiet little suburb by the name of Garryowen, which means "Garden of Owen.
" Undoubtedly none of the residents realize the influence their town has had on American military history, or the deeds of valor that have been done in its name.
The cry "Garryowen!" Bursting from the lips of a charging cavalry trooper was the last sound heard on this earth by untold numbers of Cheyennes, Sioux and Apaches, Mexican banditos under Pancho Villa, Japanese in the South Pacific, and Chinese and North Korean Communists in Korea.
Garryowen is the battle cry of the 7th U.S.Cavalry Regiment, "The Fighting Seventh."
Today a battle cry may seem an anachronism, for in the modern Army, esprit de corps has been sacrificed to organizational charts and tables.
But don't tell that to a veteran of the Fighting Seventh, especially in a saloon on Saturday night.
Of all the thousands of men who have served in the 7th Cav, perhaps no one knows its spirit better than Lieutenant Colonel Melbourne C. Chandler.
Wiry and burr-headed, with steel blue eyes and a chest splattered with medals, Chandler is the epitome of the old-time trooper.
The truth is, however, that when Mel Chandler first reported to the regiment the only steed he had ever ridden was a swivel chair and the only weapon he had ever wielded was a pencil.
Chandler had been commissioned in the Medical Service Corps and was serving as a personnel officer for the Kansas City Medical Depot when he decided that if he was going to make the Army his career, he wanted to be in the fighting part of it.
Though he knew no more about military science and tactics than any other desk officer, he managed to get transferred to the combat forces.
The next thing he knew he was reporting for duty as commanding officer of Troop H, 7th Cavalry, in the middle of corps maneuvers in Japan.
Outside of combat, he couldn't have landed in a tougher spot.
First of all, no unit likes to have a new CO brought in from the outside, especially when he's an armchair trooper.
Second, if there is ever a perfect time to pull the rug out from under him, it's on maneuvers.
In combat, helping your CO make a fool of himself might mean getting yourself killed.
But in maneuvers, with the top brass watching him all the time, it's easy.
Chandler understood this and expected the worst.
But his first few days with Troop H were full of surprises, beginning with First Sergeant Robert Early.
Chandler had expected a tough old trooper with a gravel voice.
Instead Sergeant Early was quiet, sharp and confident.
He had enlisted in the Army straight out of high school and had immediately set about learning his new trade.
There was no weapon Early could not take apart and reassemble blind-folded.
He could lead a patrol and he knew his paper work.
Further, he had taken full advantage of the Army's correspondence courses.
He not only knew soldiering, but mathematics, history and literature as well.
But for all his erudite confidence, Sergeant Early was right out of the Garryowen mold.
He was filled with the spirit of the Fighting Seventh.
That saved Mel Chandler.
Sergeant Early let the new CO know just how lucky he was to be in the best troop in the best regiment in the United States Army.
He fed the captain bits of history about the troops and the regiment.
For example, it was a battalion of the 7th Cavalry under Colonel George Armstrong Custer that had been wiped out at the Battle of The Little Big Horn.
It didn't take Captain Chandler long to realize that he had to carry a heavy load of tradition on his shoulders as commander of Troop A.
But what made the load lighter was the realization that every officer, non-com and trooper was ready and willing to help him carry it, for the good of the troop and the regiment.
Bong! Bong! Startled him awake.
The room vibrated as if a giant hand had rocked it.
Bong! A dull boom and a throbbing echo.
The walls bulged, the floor trembled, the windowpanes rattled.
He stared at the far morning, expecting a pendulum to swing across the horizon.
Bong! He raced to the window and yanked at the sash.
Bong! The wood was old, the paint alligatored.
Bong! A fresh breeze saluted him.
Six o'clock! He put his head out.
There was the slate roof of the church; ivy climbed the red brick walls like a green-scaled monster.
The clock which had struck presented an innocent face.
In the kitchen Mama was wiping the cupboards.
"There's a tower and a steeple on the church a million feet high.
And the loudest clock in the whole world!" "I know, Stephen," she smiled.
"They say that our steeple is one hundred and sixty-two feet high.
The clock you heard strike -- it's really the town clock -- was installed last April by Mrs.
Shorter, on her birthday."
He dressed, and sped outdoors.
He crossed Broome Street to Orange Square.
The steeple leaned backward, while the church advanced like a headless creature in a long, shapeless coat.
The spire seemed to hold up the sky.
Port Jervis, basking in the foothills, was the city of God.
The Dutch Reformed Church, with two steeples and its own school was on Main Street; the Episcopal Church was one block down Sussex Street; the Catholic Saint Mary's Church, with an even taller steeple and a cross on top, stood on Ball Street.
The Catholics had the largest cemetery, near the Neversink River where Main Street ran south; Stevie whistled when he passed these alien grounds.
God was everywhere, in the belfry, in the steeple, in the clouds, in the trees, and in the mountains hulking on the horizon.
Somewhere, beyond, where shadows lurked, must be the yawning pit of which Papa preached and the dreadful Lake of Fire.
So, walking in awe, he became familiar with God, who resided chiefly in Drew Centennial Church with its high steeple and clock.
There was no church like Drew Church, no preacher like Papa, who was intimate with Him, and could consign sinners to hellfire.
To know God he must follow in Papa's footsteps.
He was fortunate, and proud.
The veterans, idling on their benches in the Square, beneath the soldiers' monument, got to their feet when Papa approached: "Morning, Reverend!" His being and His will -- Stevie could not divide God from his Papa -- illumined every parish face, turned the choir into a band of angels, and the pulpit into the tollgate to Heaven.
"We have nine hundred and eleven members in our charge," Mama announced, "and three hundred and eighty Sunday-school scholars.
" When Papa went out to do God's work, Stevie often accompanied him in the buggy, which was drawn by Violet, the new black mare.
Although they journeyed westerly as far as Germantown, beyond the Erie roundhouse and the machine shop, and along the Delaware and Hudson Canal, and northward to Brooklyn, below Point Peter, he could see the church spire wherever he looked back.
Sometimes they went south and rolled past the tollhouse -- "Afternoon, Reverend! --" and crossed the suspension bridge to Matamoras; that was Pennsylvania.
In the Delaware River, three long islands were overgrown with greening trees and underbrush.
South of Laurel Grove Cemetery, and below the junction of the Neversink and the Delaware, was the Tri-State Rock, from which Stevie could spy New Jersey and Pennsylvania, as well as New York, simply by spinning around on his heel.
On these excursions, Papa instructed him on man's chief end, which was his duty to God and his own salvation.
However, a boy's lively eyes might rove.